d20 Travel Events
Freak weather change Roll for Weather (reroll 6s and 7s), and exaggerate the effect (eg “wetter” means a sudden downpour washing away tracks). If the PCs press on through difficult weather, a Con (Athletics) check is required to avoid becoming Fatigued.
Off Course The party has strayed from their intended course and risks becoming lost in their hex (if possible, otherwise reroll). A Montage p.65 is required to regain bearings (Moderate, 6S/3F). If successful, the adventurers get back on track. If unsuccessful, they become lost: the GM rolls for a Random Encounter, and the PCs must spend the next day trying to regain their bearings.
A Random Encounter occurs. Roll for Reaction and Activity (p.66) if appropriate.
Vagaries of Adventure The party experiences an unexpected turn of weal or woe (Consult the Bones). If weal (the stars align, blessed from afar, lucky charm/shibboleth, dumb luck, etc) 1d4 PCs may reroll a single roll during the adventure at a time of their choosing (excluding a die that has already been rerolled). If woe (wrong place wrong time, supernatural curse, ill fated prophesy, blind misfortune, lost mascot, etc) roll 1d6: (i) 1d4 PCs are exposed to a random disease, (ii) 1d4 hirelings or pets are exposed to a random disease or parasite, (iii) 1d4 PCs lose, damage (not usable until repaired), or use up a random Pack Gear item, (iv) the PCs have secretly been (or will be) betrayed by a hireling or other NPC, to be revealed at an opportune moment (if irrelevant, reroll), (v) Luck (Perc) save or one PC misplaces, loses, or has a valuable (secretly) stolen from them (coin pouch, etc), (vi) Random Encounter.
Forgotten Ruins beckon, tempting the adventurers with the possibility of treasure. Exploring the ancient site requires a Montage (Moderate, 6S/3F) p.65. If successful, each PC finds some loot (roll 1d6; 1-3: 1 x Carry Loot B, 4-5: 1 x Trinkets & Curios, 6: 1 x Valuables A). If unsuccessful, the party awakens the ruin’s guardian(s) instead; roll on an appropriate Random Encounter table, if a single creature it is a Boss).
Overwhelming Numbers of enemies or rivals block the party’s present course (xenophobic barbarians guard a valley, a man eating Skorn tribe is camped along the riverbank, dwarf clan guards a chasm bridge, ooze spawning cavern, etc). A Montage (Hard, 6S/2F) p.65 is required to slip by unnoticed. If failed, run a Chase to determine whether the adventurers escape!
A Random Encounter occurs. Roll for Reaction and Activity (p.66) if appropriate.
New Lore Travel is uneventful, providing ample time for study, contemplation, and the sharing of stories. The GM provides a new rumour, myth, legend or other piece of lore to the party (ideally something local, through a hireling or other NPC, but alternatively as something a PC now recalls).
Natural Wonder The party stumbles upon a natural wonder, fey sacred site, leyline, or other place of special majesty or tranquility. If the adventurers spend a day resting here, one PC suffering Madness may make a Luck (Will) save to remove it. This effect functions only once per character. Random Encounters are unlikely here, but if so roll Reaction with advantage.
Other Travellers The party encounters other travellers, roll 1d8: (i) 1d3 scouts, (ii-iii) 2d6+10 border guard, (iv) merchant caravan, (v) 1d4+2 rival adventurers, (vi) noble with entourage, (vii) 4d6+10 religious pilgrims, (viii) GM special.
A Random Encounter occurs. Roll for Reaction and Activity (p.66) if appropriate.
Camaraderie The explorers’ travel is relatively uneventful, providing ample time to strengthen party bonds. One player may choose to spin a tale or reveal a secret or other special detail about their PC’s history (eg old deed, interesting locale, NPC encounter, memorable event, party bond, prior adventure, etc; GM veto applies). If the table is entertained, each PC may choose to recover 1 Luck or take a Short Rest. A PC may benefit from this event once per adventure only.
Short Cut The opportunity to take a short cut arises if the party can find it (mountain pass, game trail, Bulette tunnel bypass, etc). Resolve as an Int or Perc (Wilderness Lore) check. On a Great Success the party enters this hex for free.
Lost Supplies The party must make a group Luck save or their rations/water are halved (failure) or run out (Terrible Failure). Perhaps tainted by parasites, spoiled by disease, stolen by animals, overeaten after too many ales, dropped in a chase, etc. PCs that do not eat or drink for twenty four hours become Starving. If available, PCs may consume tainted food or water, but each meal requires a Luck (Con) check to avoid contracting a random disease or suffering a Minor Poison effect (p.214)
A Random Encounter occurs. Roll for Reaction and Activity (p.66) if appropriate.
Discovery As luck would have it, the company discovers or otherwise happens upon any secret information about the current hex (if they have not already found it). If there is no such information, they discover a monster Lair instead. Roll for a Random Encounter, but use Lair numbers for # Appearing (p.162). Consult the Bones to determine whether one of the Lair’s outer sentries have detected the PCs (depending on the circumstances, including mode of party travel).
Unfortunate Injury A random NPC (hireling, henchmen, other NPC) or animal (horse, mule, dog etc) falls ill, lame, or suffers a Sprained Ankle (Entry #5 Injuries & Setbacks table). A Ranger Beast Companion may choose to make a Luck (Con) save to resist. If there are no NPCs or animals in the party, then a PC is affected (they may choose to resist like a Beast Companion). This will impact company Travel Speed unless the injured character or animal can be assisted (p.134). Characters can be helped with the Support Travel Role, the GM determines whether animals may be assisted.
Taxing Terrain Difficult and unexpected terrain impedes the explorers’ path (river crossing, landslide, steep valley, ruined bridge, forest fire, etc). Progress is slow and taxing, requiring a Montage (Hard, 6S/2F) p.65. If failed the party is Fatigued and a random PC uses up or loses a piece of relevant gear (eg rope, climbing gear, rations, and so on).
A Random Encounter occurs. Roll for Reaction and Activity (p.66) if appropriate.
Perfect Campsite The company has a chance to locate the perfect campsite, providing comfort and safety in equal measure. A Perc (Wilderness Lore*) check is required. On a success, all PCs restore 1d3 lost attribute points, one Reroll, or one point of Luck (once per adventure only).